Baranów Sandomierski is located 24 kilometers (7.5 miles) south-southwest of Sandomierz.
In 1921, there were 745 Jews living in the town (42 percent of the total population).
The Jews of Baranów, mostly poor and barely making a living were unprepared for the coming of war.
Except for a few well-to-do families, they did not acquire any supplies.
Hunger therefore followed immediately upon the German occupation in September 1939.
Initially, the Wehrmacht administered the town, which did not particularly mistreat the Jews, but required them to perform forced labor.
Jewish men worked on road repairs, women were cleaning and doing laundry, all returning after work to their quarters in Baranów.
Later, the Polish (Blue) Police maintained order, with periodic visits by SS-men who abused the Jews as they pleased.
A man by the name of Numerik, who was a shepherd before the war working for a Jew, conveniently remembered his distant German heritage, deciding that he was a member of the “master race,” and became the ruler of the town, with the Bürgermeister deferring to him.
Numerik took money from the Jews, and also beat and abused them.
(He is reported to have organized the deportation of Baranów’s Jews and personally to have shot Jews.)
After the outbreak of the German-Soviet war, Jews were sent to work camps in Biesiadka, Dęba, and Huta Komorowska.
In Plaszów and Mielec the letters KL were tattooed on the hands of Jews.
Polish policemen were the guards and frequently beat the Jews.
There were about 180 Baranów Jews in all the work camps.
They received passes to visit their families from Saturday afternoon until the roll call Monday morning, but they chose to return Sunday afternoon, to make sure they were not late.
A German by the name of Nickel got drunk and announced that he must kill two Jews to prove himself to his friends.
He shot and killed two brothers.
The Baranów ghetto was established on June 30, 1942 to facilitate the extermination of the Jews of Baranów and its surroundings, which began on July 20, 1942 – three weeks later.
The ghetto encompassed part of the market place and sections of adjoining streets.
Anticipating disaster, some Jews (including two Jewish policemen) managed to escape but perished later.
A day before the liquidation, 40 Jews from Tarnobrzeg were marched to the Baranów ghetto guarded by Polish policemen.
On Sunday, the ghetto Jews were ordered to assemble on Monday morning in the market place, taking with them not more than 25 pounds of their belongings and leaving the keys to their homes in the door.
Of the assembled Jews, the Germans took 20 or 30 elderly people and children by horse and cart to the cemetery, where Jews had been forced to dig a ditch, and they shot them there; Poles were brought in to cover the ditch.
The rest of the assembled Jews were marched to the railroad station and put into cattle cars that already contained Jews from Rozwadów and Łańcut.
For two days the train traveled the 50 kilometers (31 miles) to Dębica, where a selection took place, including Jews brought from Rozwadów, Tarnobrzeg, Kolbuszowa, and Dębica (about 10,000 people).
SS men from Pustków carried out the selection.
The elderly were immediately shot; some others were taken to work camps, and some to the ghetto in Dębica.
On Thursday, the rest were transported to the Bełżec extermination camp.
At the time of the deportation in July 1942, the Hauser family consisting of Natan, his wife Dora, and their two children, escaped and found shelter with a farmer in a neighboring village.
After six months the farmer asked them to leave, as he was afraid.
Therefore, the family returned to Baranów, where they hid in the hayloft of Stanisław Karol Wawrzycki, a Christian friend from before the war.
When it became too dangerous for them to stay in Baranów, Wawrzycki took them to a forester and continued thereafter to supply them with food.
Here the Hauser family survived until the arrival of the Red Army in July 1944.
After the war, Poles were afraid returning Jews would claim their possessions and most were not welcoming; returning Jews soon left, as they feared for their lives.
In the Jewish cemeteries only one tombstone remained intact.
The yizkor book, Sefer Yizkor Barnov, includes a listing of 162 names of the heads of Jewish families in Baranów who perished in the Holocaust.
Having been derived entirely from the memories of survivors, the list cannot claim to be complete or accurate.
The Jewish inhabitants of the following nearby villages perished along with the Jewish population of Baranów: Dąbrowica, Wola, Dymitrów, Skopanie, Padew, Przykop, Knapy, and Krasiczyn.
