Bircza is located 24 kilometers (15 miles) southwest of Przemyśl.
By 1921, there were 1,038 Jews residing there, constituting 54 percent of the village’s population.
Before World War II, the town had three ethnic quarters.
Poles occupied the eastern part of the market square, Ukrainians the western and southern parts, and the Jews lived in the northern part of the square.
In September 1939, Bircza was briefly under German occupation.
On September 17, 1939, it was taken over by the Soviets and remained under their rule until the invasion of the Soviet Union by the German army on June 22, 1941.
In the summer of 1940, a number of Bircza’s Jews, who declared that they desired to move to German-occupied Polish territory, were deported instead into the eastern part of the Soviet Union.
According to survivor Avraham Kern, an unfenced ghetto was established in Bircza immediately upon the renewed German occupation, at the end of June 1941.
The German authorities announced that the entire village was a ghetto.
The Jewish population was informed that no one was allowed to leave Bircza on pain of death.
The Germans, lacking a presence there, established a Judenrat and charged it with fulfilling German orders.
Famine, including deaths from starvation, followed the establishment of the ghetto.
As a result, many Jews risked their lives seeking food in the surrounding villages.
According to Kern, the Ukrainian police never killed any of the ghetto’s inhabitants; yet there were instances when local Poles or Ukrainians murdered Jews attempting to escape from the ghetto.
The ghetto’s inhabitants were not conscripted for forced labor.
There were, however, some Jews who were taken to a labor camp (e.g. survivor Izrael Rubinfeld).
Kern and his friends organized the clandestine teaching of Hebrew and Jewish history for the ghetto’s children.
These classes lasted only a few months, as a Ukrainian policeman uncovered their existence and forced them to cease.
Nobody was punished, due to connections one parent had with the Ukrainian police.
The first mass execution of Bircza’s Jews took place in April 1942, when 50 of them were rounded up, shot on a hill outside of the village, and buried in a mass grave.
One of the victims was Rubinfeld’s father.
Several other mass executions – most likely including Jews from other localities – were carried out prior to the ghetto’s liquidation.
The precise dating of these events remains unclear, but most secondary sources cite 16, reportedly wealthy, Jews shot on Kamienna Górka in May 1942, and between May and August of that same year approximately 200 Jews were shot at the Jewish cemetery.
In Bircza Stara (Wierzysko) 500 (or according to another source 800) people were executed in either July or August 1942.
The bodies of all of these victims were exhumed in 1957 and buried in the Jewish cemetery in Przemyśl.
Sometime prior to the ghetto’s liquidation, Jews from other places in the vicinity were brought to the Bircza ghetto, including Jews from Pruchnik and from Leszczawa Dolna.
The ghetto was liquidated in mid-August 1942.
Forty-eight hours before the deportation, on pain of death, Bircza’s Jews were ordered to collect a large contribution of money, wedding rings, and other jewelry.
After the ransom was paid, the community was ordered to gather at the village square at 4:00 P.M.
Men wearing uniforms shot those who did not report as instructed.
All the ghetto residents were held in the square overnight, in the open, until dawn and were then marched 24 kilometers (15 miles) to the Przemyśl ghetto.
The old and children were driven in carts, from which many elderly people were thrown and shot along the way.
In Przemyśl, 150 to 160 Jews were selected and sent for labor in Rzeszów.
The remainder was deported soon afterwards to the Bełżec extermination camp.
