According to the 1921 census there were 479 Jews living in Brzostek.
The community occupied the village square, 20 Czerwca and Żydowska Streets; the synagogue was located on the latter.
By 1939 Brzostek had an estimated 500 Jewish residents.
A significant number of Brzostek’s Jews fled to the east on the outbreak of war, into the part of Poland annexed by the Soviet Union in the fall of 1939.
With the occupation, the Germans established a Jewish council (Judenrat), chaired by Israel Schonwetter.
Its primary task was to supply laborers for agricultural work, to level and beautify the village square, and to pave roads.
Labor squads building fortifications in Wiśniowa were driven to work on trucks and brought back in the evening.
By February 1940, a committee for refugee relief had been established in Brzostek.
A man named Goldman was its chairman.
Refugees were quartered in the synagogue; their numbers and place of origin is unknown.
In 1942, a number of Jews from the Jodłowa ghetto were transferred to Brzostek.
In the summer of 1941, after the invasion of the Soviet Union, the Germans selected around 40 professionals from among Brzostek’s Jews to be sent to a labor camp in Lwów.
One of the men selected, Adam Szus, recalls that the Germans threatened to kill his parents after he went into hiding to avoid deportation.
By the summer of 1941, a branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) had been established in Brzostek.
It operated briefly, only to be closed in September 1941 by the Kraków JSS headquarters, in response to an assessment by the Jasło branch describing the Brzostek JSS’s “insignificant activity.”
Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Jasło County, established that the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941 (most likely in the autumn), when a ghetto in Jasło was established.
One of the ghettos created around that time was in Brzostek.
An open ghetto, unguarded and unfenced, it most likely included the village square and Żydowska Street.
At the beginning of 1942, a number of Jews were seized for work in labor camps, including in Pustków.
On May 1, 1942, the Germans shot eight Jewish communists who were then buried in the Jewish cemetery on Szkotnia Street.
Two days before the ghetto’s liquidation on August 12, 1942, the Gestapo requested chairman Schonwetter to report to the Polish police station for questioning, where he was then held until the Aktion.
The wife of the Polish police commander informed Schonwetter’s family of the planned execution.
The police commander released Schonwetter, asking him to “go for a walk.”
Schonwetter returned to the jail saying: “I know exactly what is happening.
But I am the leader of this community.
I will stand with my people.”
According to Wieliczko, Jews from the Brzostek ghetto were brought to nearby Kołaczyce on August 12, 1942.
Following a selection, some were sent to a labor camp in Jasło.
Several people were shot during the liquidation Aktion in Kołaczyce.
Others (as many as 260 people) were transported by the Germans to the Podzamcze Forest (also referred to as the forest in Kowalowy) near Krajowice village and then shot that same afternoon.
Members of the Jasło Gestapo supervised the execution.
