Jodłowa is located 29 kilometers (18 miles) southeast of Tarnów.
There were 301 Jews living in Jodłowa in 1921.
After the German occupation, a Jewish council (Judenrat) was established in Jodłowa at the beginning of 1940.
Salamon Kanarek served as its chairman and Abraham Pariser as his deputy.
In November 1940, there were 30 refugees from Kraków and Łódź in the village.
By February 1941 the number of refugees had risen to 50.
They were housed with local Jews, one-to-two persons per family.
The total number of Jewish families in Jodłowa stood at 72.
A self-help committee that the Jasło Judenrat had ordered to be established in Jodłowa was at this time “closed.”
According to survivor Jack Pariser, no Germans were permanently stationed in the village and a unit of Polish (Blue) Police maintained order.
The community was usually aware of German visits, as the Jews had to provide laborers or money.
During one of the first raids, Jodłowa’s Jews were forced to remove the Torah from the synagogue and walk on it.
Jewish businesses were confiscated, but a majority of the Jews were engaged in agriculture and were able to keep their land and livestock until the very end.
Pariser stated that with the exception of a few punitive Aktions, the Jews lived peacefully in Jodłowa until the summer of 1942.
Mieczysław Wieliczko, historian of Kreis Jasło, established that the process of ghettoization in the Kreis was completed in 1941.
One of the ghettos created around that time was in Jodłowa.
The open ghetto most likely included the village square and remained unguarded and unfenced.
A branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) was established in the village on July 21, 1941.
Its three members were: the Judenrat chairman Kanarek, a teacher Manes Guttman (deputy), and Salamon Kohn.
Guttman was in charge of childcare.
At that time, there were 120 Jewish children aged 1 to 18.
Of that number, 50 (aged 6 to 14) were selected for childcare, i.e.
additional food, physical education, singing, needlework, and some form of education “to prevent illiteracy.”
A Dr. Laja was employed by the Judenrat to attend to the children’s medical needs.
In the summer of 1941, a soup kitchen was opened in Jodłowa.
The JSS branch was closed again by September 15, 1941, due to “minimal” activity.
In September 1941, there were 345 Jews in Jodłowa.
The community was vaccinated for typhus at this time.
As reported by A.
Rubin, in February and March 1942, a number of men were selected for labor camps in Mielec and Pustków.
Survivor, Jakób Schenker testified that in June 1942, 50 men were sent to the latter.
According to child survivor Regina Rueck (born 1935), her family and possibly a number of other Jodłowa Jews were deported to the Brzostek ghetto, most likely in 1942.
They were allowed to take clothing and bedding, and were quartered in Brzostek’s synagogue.
Most sources date the ghetto’s liquidation on August 12, 1942.
On August 11, SS troops came to the village and paid a short visit to the Polish (Blue) Police.
The Polish Police warned the Jewish community that the Germans planned to shoot all of them on the following day, after reporting to the village square for supposed transfer to a larger ghetto.
News spread amongst the families who lived around the square, as well as to those who lived outside of the Jewish quarter.
Survivors Schenker and Pariser estimate that over 100 Jews escaped that night; close to 30 survived the war.
In the course of the liquidation, 21 to 25 Jews were shot at various points in the village en route to the place of execution.
Another 160 to 180 people were taken to a forest next to the village of Przeczyca and shot.
Members of the Baudienst (labor battalion for Poles) in Jasło were forced to dig the graves for Jodłowa’s Jews.
Two witnesses from among this group (Jan Rączka and Władysław M.)
testified that the victims were led in groups of 10 to the grave and forced to undress.
Standing by the grave, they were shot one by one in the back of the head.
