Kańczuga is located 40 kilometers (25 miles) northwest of Przemyśl.
There were 948 Jews living there in 1939.
Upon occupation, Kańczuga’s Jews received German permission to remain in their town, while many other communities in the vicinity were forced to relocate to the Soviet-occupied regions of Poland.
In June 1941, the Kańczuga branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) reported 810 Jewish residents.
Jews living in eleven nearby villages were part of the collective community called Kańczuga-Land (Kańczuga – wieś) with headquarters in Żuklin, located less than 2 kilometers (1.2 miles) from Kańczuga.
Sometime before 1941, 250 members of this predominantly farming community were stripped of their land.
Their Judenrat, chaired by a man named Mörsel, continually requested JSS assistance, emphasizing that Kańczuga-Land was “entirely separate” from Kańczuga.
In its last letter to the JSS headquarters in Kraków, dated October 2, 1941, the community was reportedly caring for 18 refugees.
In May 1942, the Kańczuga JSS described the situation as follows: “Since January 1942, the Jews in the Kreis are restricted in their movement.
One must not leave [Kańczuga] and as a result the situation of our community has worsened by 100 percent.”
Survivor Moses Zellerkraut also noted in his brief testimony that “the Jews cannot leave the town.”
The ban on Jewish freedom of movement in and out of Kańczuga meant that, in effect, an open ghetto was established, bounded by the town’s limits; this reflected also the general pattern of ghetto establishment in Kreis Jaroslau during the course of the 1941-1942.
According to Sefer Lantsut, the head of Kreis Jaroslau, Georg Eisenlohr, issued an order on December 18, 1941 forbidding the Jews from leaving their places of domicile on pain of death.
“Domicile” was defined as an urban or rural community, a village, or lodging place.
The order went into effect on January 1, 1942.
It is very likely that the Kańczuga-Land community was transferred to Kańczuga town, as it was common procedure to concentrate the rural Jewish population in nearby towns; however, no archival documentation could be located to confirm this.
In October 1941, the Kańczuga JSS issued its final report, giving the Jewish population as 808 residents.
This record was made several months before the likely transfer of the Kańczuga-Land Jews.
There is a little information available on the fate of Kańczuga’s Jews during the occupation.
Most of them occupied Węgierska, Świętej Barbary, and Długa Streets.
Szmiel Westreich was the chairman of the Judenrat.
Westreich also chaired the JSS branch set up in December 1940, which also included Abraham Turm (secretary) and Aron Freund.
The JSS office was located on 79 Długa Street.
In mid-September 1941, 17 Jews were rounded up and transferred to the police prison in Jarosław.
During 1940-1941, there were only three cases of typhus registered.
In March 1942, the community was vaccinated for typhus.
There was no Jewish doctor in Kańczuga.
As of May 1942, 60 Jews were employed in nearby Przeworsk, each day they would return for the night to Kańczuga.
Survivor Jakub Kesstecher, who moved to Kańczuga in June 1942, testified that there were three large expropriations imposed prior to the liquidation of the community.
In July 1942, the Germans began issuing Jewish identity stamps.
Only those who received special stamps were to be spared from deportation.
At first 350 documents were stamped, yet a subsequent registration reduced the number to 100.
After the last registration, conducted on July 28, 1942, only four families were permitted to stay in Kańczuga.
Secondary sources report that Kańczuga’s liquidation took place on either August 1 or 8, 1942.
According to Kesstecher, the community was deported to a transit camp in Pełkinie, where a number of men were selected for labor camps, children and the elderly were shot, and the remainder was sent to the Bełżec extermination camp.
Kesstecher, however, does not mention the murder of 246 Jews at the community cemetery in Siedleczka (3 kilometers (1.8 miles) south of Kańczuga), as noted by other primary sources.
This may be because the shooting, which took place over three days (around August 12), was conducted after the departure of most of the Jews to Pełkinie.
Prior to their execution, Jews were held in an unfinished synagogue in Kańczuga.
There were also 20 Jews registered as shot between August and October 1942.
The bodies were buried in a private garden on Węgierska Street.
