Niebylec is located approximately 22 kilometers (16 miles) south of Rzeszów.
An estimated 450 Jews were living in the Niebylec gmina on the eve of World War II.
Following the German invasion in September, the German authorities had established a Jewish council (Judenrat) in Niebylec by the end of 1939.
In March 1940, Moses Pariser was its chairman.
The German Gendarmerie also operated a jail in the village.
In December 1939, 20 refugees from Kalisz and Łódź were sent via Rzeszów to Niebylec, bringing the number of Jews up to approximately 220.
As all of them arrived with almost nothing, the Judenrat provided them with free housing (some families were housed in nearby Lutcza), as well as bread, potatoes, and milk.
They also received a small amount of cash and firewood; their shoes were repaired at the Judenrat’s expense.
A doctor was brought in to care for two that had fallen ill.
One of them was a shochet, Dawid Reicher (or Rescher) who “suddenly lost his mind.”
By May 1940, the town’s Jews had spent 3,000 złoty on the newcomers’ sustenance, but had received only 150 złoty in assistance from the Kraków branch of the American Jewish Joint Distribution Committee (AJDC).
In the spring of 1940, the Judenrat engaged in providing seeds for Jewish farmers holding small plots.
Out of the approximately 50 farming families in the gmina, 17 were unable to fully sow their fields.
The authorities threatened to expropriate them as “negligent” and put their farmland under Polish administration.
Five of those families lived in Lutcza, four in Blizianka, three in Niebylec, two each in Baryczka and Jawornik, and one in Gwoźnica Górna.
They owned a total of 49 morgi (1 morga is approximately 5,600 square meters or 6,698 square yards), but were able to sow only 32, leaving 17 to lie fallow.
Pariser pleaded with the AJDC for financial help, as he feared that those farmers would be resettled to Niebylec, “and if that were to happen, a few more vagrant families would come in.”
A JSS committee was later set up to aid the refugees.
It acted under the Judenrat’s supervision and included Aron Uhes, Hersch Freund, and later, Israel Feldman.
In August 1940, the Rzeszów Judenrat sent 10 new refugees from Kraków to Niebylec.
Soon after, a much larger group of 40 expellees followed, bringing the number of newcomers to 64 by September 1940.
This number of refugees remained stable until at least January 1941.
In November 1940, the Judenrat was ordered to register Jews for forced labor; however, there is no information regarding the forced labor performed in Niebylec or its surroudnings.
On December 17, 1941, the Reichshof Kreishauptmann, Heinz Ehaus, ordered the establishment of ghettos in the Kreis.
In Rzeszów, the order was effective on January 10, 1942; whereas for the remainder of the Kreis on February 1, 1942.
The Jewish residential area in Niebylec was most likely established as a ghetto shortly after this date.
While not fenced, its inhabitants were allowed to leave it only with written permission.
Laborers conscripted to work outside the ghetto were granted such permission.
Similar to other places in the region, the Jews living in the vicinity of Niebylec were ordered to move there in March 1942.
An estimated 450 Jews were collected in the Niebylec ghetto during this period.
On April 14, 1942, the Gestapo shot seven ghetto residents.
Of those executed, five names are known: Ida Brener (60 years old), Jankiel Fridrich (60), Szymon Mer (90), Józef Graz (45) and Mozes Schneiwas (70).
All were buried in a mass grave at the Jewish cemetery.
In June 1942, the German authorities in Kraków issued an order for all the Jews of Kreis Reichshof to be concentrated in the Rzeszów ghetto for deportation, as Kreishauptmann Ehaus was eager to be the first to render his Kreis “judenrein” (cleansed of Jews) in Distrikt Krakau.
As a result, in the second half of June, the Gendarmerie supervised the transfer of the Jews from all the other Kreis ghettos into the Rzeszów ghetto, such that some 22,000 Jews were concentrated there by the beginning of July 1942.
The Niebylec ghetto was liquidated on June 25, 1942.
Agents of the Sonderdienst killed three Jewish merchants during the transport to Rzeszów.
Aron Blum and Aron Rain were buried in the village of Połomia; Szandla Rain in Baryczka.
In Rzeszów, the Niebylec Jews shared the fate of others concentrated there and were sent in the course of the July 1942 deportations to the Bełżec extermination camp.
In November 1943, the Gestapo shot 9 Jews and the 11 Poles, who had been sheltering them, in the neighboring village of Połomia.
