Ropczyce is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east of Kraków.
On the eve of war in 1939, there were about 1,200 Jews living in Ropczyce.
Following the invasion of Poland, German troops occupied Ropczyce on September 8, 1939.
In the first days of the conflict, the Germans bombed the town heavily.
Jewish homes were particularly affected, leaving more than 30 families without shelter.
Upon entering Ropczyce, the Germans burned down the local synagogue, and they harassed and humiliated the Jewish population.
Soon after, the Germans began to conscript Jews for forced labor.
In 1939 or early in 1940, the Germans created a Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by Dr. Arnold Meister.
Immediately after its establishment, the Judenrat began to take care of the numerous needs of the Jewish community.
At the end of 1940, under the patronage of the Judenrat, a public kitchen, a shelter, and a “women’s committee” were established.
In 1941 and 1942, following the establishment of a local branch of the Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization, many of the impoverished and malnourished Jewish children in Ropczyce were provided with food and medical assistance.
By the spring of 1940, Ropczyce had become a collection point for Jewish refugees from the territories annexed by the Third Reich and from neighboring villages.
The Jewish population in the town increased from 773 in 1940 to over 1,000 in 1941.
On May 7, 1942, on orders from the Security Police in Dębica, 75 men capable of physical work were sent to the labor camp in Pustków.
A second roundup took place at the beginning of June 1942.
The Germans shot 23 people on the spot, and sent 150 more to the Pustków labor camp.
In late June 1942, the Jews from Ropczyce and neighboring villages were forced into a ghetto located on Jewish Street.
The conditions in the ghetto were extremely hard due to severe overcrowding.
In July 1942, the Germans liquidated the ghetto.
They shot 28 people, mostly children and the elderly on the spot, while the majority of the population was escorted on July 23 to the nearby town of Sędziszów.
From there, most of them were sent to the Bełżec extermination camp.
A group of young women was loaded on cattle cars destined for this extermination camp.
According to information from local Christians, the train also carried lime, which may have poisoned the passengers; however, it is more likely that they were gassed upon arrival at Bełżec.
A number of the Jews from Ropczyce were selected as unfit for travel, and the SS and Gendarmerie shot several hundred Jews on the spot in Sędziszów and buried them in a mass grave at the Jewish cemetery.
