Sędziszów Małopolski is located about 120 kilometers (75 miles) east of Kraków.
In 1921, when the town became part of the re-established Polish state, there were only 861 Jewish residents in Sędziszów Małopolski.
Soon after the invasion of Poland, German troops entered Sędziszów Małopolski on September 8, 1939.
When the Germans established the Generalgouvernement in November 1939, the town became part of Kreis Debica, within Distrikt Krakau.
A branch of the Security Police (Sipo-Aussendienststelle) based in Dębica organized the large Aktions against the Jews within its area of jurisdiction, including the town of Sędziszów Małopolski, assisted by the German Order Police and other auxiliary forces.
In 1939, there were 1,000 Jewish residents in the town.
In the period from 1939 to 1941, the Germans imposed a series of discriminatory measures against the local Jewish population.
These included the confiscation of Jewish property, the imposition of forced “contributions”, the obligation to wear white armbands bearing a blue Star of David, and mandatory registration.
In addition, the Germans prohibited the Jews from leaving the town limits and conscripted them to various kinds of compulsory hard labor.
There is very little information regarding the fate of the Jewish population prior to the establishment of the ghetto in June 1942.
A Jewish council (Judenrat) headed by a man named Faust was established and made responsible for providing the daily quotas of forced laborers, who were mainly employed in construction and clean-up work.
Records of the local Jewish Social Self-Help (JSS) organization indicate that until September 26, 1941, despite the dire situation of the Jews in the town, there was no public kitchen.
This was mainly due to the difficulties encountered raising funds to restore the local synagogue, in which the kitchen was to be established.
Although no epidemic of typhus broke out in Sędziszów Małopolski, poor sanitary conditions among the Jewish population forced Meilech Löw, the head of the local JSS, to request funds to buy medical supplies in January 1942.
On February 2, 1942, the public kitchen, which served around 100 free meals per day, was finally opened.
However, the living conditions in the town were also affected by considerable overcrowding.
By February 15, 1942, the number of Jews in Sędziszów Małopolski had reached 1,380, including many refugees who had arrived from the nearby town of Kołbuszowa.
At the beginning of May 1942, 50 young Jews were sent to the Pustków labor camp.
The Germans established an open ghetto in Sędziszów Małopolski in June 1942, in an area circumscribed by three buildings.
In addition to local Jews, it very briefly held several hundred Jews from the village of Ropczyce who were concentrated there on July 23, 1942, just one day before the ghetto’s liquidation.
This brought the number of Jews in the ghetto to about 1,900.
The ghetto was liquidated on July 24, 1942.
Approximately 400 Jews, many of them old people, children, and women from Ropczyce, were shot on the spot by members of the SS and the Gendarmerie after a selection.
Their remains were buried in a mass grave in the Jewish cemetery.
About 1,500 Jews were dispatched via Dębica to the extermination camp at Bełżec.
Although the town was officially declared to have been “cleansed of Jews” (judenrein) following the liquidation of the ghetto, at least 19 Jews were discovered subsequently in hiding and were immediately shot.
